good day I'm Norman Wildberger now we have some
slightly longer videos that we can play with
so it's probably a good time for us to stop and
have a breather and review some of the material
that we've already been talking about in this
series this is a series on the foundations of
mathematics where I want to do several things I
want to first of all propose a logical relatively
clear relatively simple approach to building
up mathematics from the start and I want to
cover most of the main areas of mathematics
systematically and consistently so that we have
a strong logical position throughout the subject
one of the other aims is to strengthen mathematics
education I believe that having a proper framework
for the subject in terms of the theory will make
it much easier for mathematics educators to try to
figure out what they should be teaching students
at various stages so although we're not directly
feeding into school curriculum indirectly laying
the foundations ought to have a major impact to
mathematics education and structuring curriculum
for students now to be honest there's a third aim
of this series which is to bring down modern pure
mathematics a few pegs I'm firmly of the opinion
that modern mathematics has gone astray that
logically it no longer hangs together properly
and I know that my fellow colleagues are going to
be reluctant to admit that but I'm going to try to
expose the flaws and the weaknesses of the subject
so that we can move ahead so that we can fix them
and move towards a brighter more consistent more
pleasant approach to this greatest of all subjects
okay so in the last few videos we've been talking
about our approach to polynomials and we've
approached it to through a idea called a poly
number so it's probably a good idea for us to have
a review of the basic structure of arithmetic that
we've developed so far let's go right back to the
beginning of the series where we started out by
talking about arithmetic with natural numbers
and then integers and then fractions and then
finally rational numbers so we did that in stages
and it's instructive when we start thinking about
arithmetic with polynomials to go back to
arithmetic with ordinary numbers that we'll
see that two subjects are very parallel have a
lot of close connections all right so from our
very first video in this series you may remember
a long time ago we introduced natural numbers in
a very naive way just as a bunch of strokes
on a line on the page and at first we just
had very naive kind of names for these things but
eventually we talked about the hindu-arabic number
system and that's the one that we're now going
to be using subsequently so we have our idea
of natural numbers we have operations of addition
and multiplication defined on natural numbers the
next important step is to define what an integer
is so we define what an integer was in terms of
what a natural number was and let me remind you
that what we did is we chose ordered pairs of
natural numbers to be integers the ordered pairs
say m and n we like to write in this notation so
m and then sort of a downward slash N and we're
thinking of this as sort of being a little bit
like subtraction okay and they say that this is M
less m and m and n are natural numbers these are
the things we've defined at the first stage now
there's a crucial notion of equality that m less
n equals K LSL precisely when M plus L equals k
plus M so these objects then become the integers
so for example seven less four is what we would
normally call three and four or less seven is
what we would normally call minus three this
one here is rather special one less one that's
the number zero now when we move from the natural
numbers to the integers we enlarge our arithmetic
because we can now talk about subtraction along
with addition and multiplication now there's
another possible way of extending the natural
numbers and that's by introducing essentially
well fractions okay so fractions is a new type of
mathematical object which are also ordered pairs
of natural numbers just as the integers were
but now the notation is slightly different we
have an M with a sort of upward slash n and our
agreement is that M / N or M over N as we prefer
to say equals K over L precisely when M times
L equals K times n so these are the things that
we usually call fractions or sometimes positive
fractions we will just say fractions so things
like 1/2 and 1/3 and we can define the operations
of addition multiplication and division for these
fractions so for example 1/2 plus 1/3 is 5/6
and note the pretty close similarity between
these two concepts the only difference between the
equalities here are replacing the plus operation
with the multiplication operation all right
so we've started with the natural numbers as
a type of mathematical object we've created the
integers as a new type of mathematical object and
also the fractions and now the culminating thing
is so sort of to combine those two ideas to get
the rational numbers now what we did is we got
the rational numbers this way by going from the
integers and doing something to integers and what
we do to the integers is really the same kind of
thing as we did from numbers to get fractions
we consider ordered pairs of integers now a
and B are integers and we consider expressions
of the form a over B where a and B are integers
but a special requirement that the second one B
must not be 0 and the notion of equality between
these rational numbers was very much like the one
up here a over B equals C over D precisely when a
D equals B C okay and now the rational numbers
which intuitively are just all the fractions
where we include negative fractions as well
as positive fractions all of those form what
mathematicians call a field meaning we have four
operations plus times those are our original two
and then two new ones some sense the inverses
of plus and times minus and divide now we have
various laws that these operations satisfy and
we get a very beautiful closed domain for doing
arithmetic this is the field of rational numbers
and this is where most of mathematics ultimately
takes place very strong statement all right most
of mathematics ultimately takes place in this
field of rational numbers or something that's
pretty close to it it's a very very fundamental
object so that was arithmetic in some sense
that's sort of primary school arithmetic now
we move to high school arithmetic where we go up
a level and look at more sophisticated analogues
of each one of these four types of objects so
from the primary school to the high school is
going from numbers to paly numbers so we started
studying positive Paulie numbers either a type
of mathematical object that we gave this name for
Paulie number with a plus sign and the plus sign
refers to the fact that we're including zero
as well as the natural numbers we're going a
little bit past the natural numbers including
zero in the coefficients allowed so a positive
Polly number is just a column of natural numbers
or a zero a finite column with a little bracket
up on top that little bracket tells us alerts
us that we're talking about a polly number okay
I'm not going to review everything but just a
brief idea we have a Polly number P and another
probably number Q they don't have to have the
same degree we can add them we do that in the
most simple way we add each level 2 plus 1 is 3
0 plus 4 is 4 13 plus well there's nothing here
so it counts like 0 is 13 multiplication is
more subtle so at the top level sort of the
zeroth level the multiplication of these two is
just like ordinary multiplication 2 times 1 is
2 at the second level what we do is we take this
times this Plus this times this so 2 times 4 plus
0 times 1 is 8 at the next level here we take this
times whatever is here Plus this times whatever
is there Plus this times whatever is there well
the only one that's nonzero is 13 and at the next
level 2 times whatever's here 0 times whatever
is here 13 times 4 0 times 1 13 times 4 is 52
okay and then we talked about the arithmetic
of these positive poly numbers and then we
enlarged our view somewhat by introducing
more general objects by introducing poly
numbers whose coefficients are allowed to
be negative as well as zero or positive and
the addition and the multiplication of those poly
numbers are just as before exist that now there's
possibly negative numbers floating around too we
also introduced some notation for converting a
positive poly number as a column like this
to a more standard looking polynomial type
object and the way we did that is by introducing
a symbol for a very special poly number the poly
number which is sort of the smallest one which
is not actually sort of like a number the ones
up at the top here are acting just like ordinary
numbers the next one down this one here is the
first one that's sort of beyond the numbers
we're calling it alpha then alpha squared is
this one with two zeros alpha cubed is this
one with three zeros and so on and with the
help of these powers of alpha we can write an
arbitrary poly number like this as three times
alpha to the zero I can mention that just like
1 plus minus 1 times alpha to the 1 plus 0 times
alpha to the 2 and 1 times alpha cubed and
we eventually agree that we would relax our
notation so this poly number here has another
name this is the standard alpha form for this
poly number it's just another way of writing down
the same mathematical object and now it turns out
that this is well rather familiar to anybody
who's done high school or college mathematics
it's a polynomial in alpha and then it turns out
that the addition and the multiplication and the
subtraction of these polynomials are just exactly
the same as the corresponding operations on the
associated paly numbers so whether we're working
with pali numbers or with polynomials it really
comes down to the same thing the advantage in this
point of view is that we compress the definition
of a polynomial to its essentials the essential
aspect of a polynomial is the row or the column
of coefficients the variable itself is actually
rather unimportant and here we've introduced the
variable around a specific one only sort of as
a secondary step just to allow us to write the
polynomial or azan t'lay rather than vertically
that's what we've done so far so I'd like to just
back away one step now and have a look at sort
of the general picture that we're developing
we've talked about the various objects in ordinary
arithmetic natural numbers integers fractions and
rational numbers and what I'd like to do now
is introduce the idea that the poly situation
is in some sense a mirror of this one just sort
of upper level in complexity so for each of the
objects over here there's a corresponding kind of
object over here so natural numbers correspond to
something that we might call natural poly numbers
integers correspond to something we might call
integral poly numbers fractions to fractional
poly numbers and rational numbers to rational
poly numbers so what are these various things
well I'd like to proceed a little bit differently
than previously so if there's a revaluation of
poly numbers now by starting with this one right
here we haven't actually defined poly num as a
type yet we started by defining positive poly
numbers whereas zeros were allowed now we're
gonna say well actually when we started with
natural numbers we didn't include zero right
zero is actually a relatively sophisticated
idea going back to the hindu-arabic system it's
more naive it's more simple-minded to think of
an arithmetic that doesn't have a zero so what
would happen if we started thinking about Paulie
numbers in that framework now we only have
one two three four five and so on well that
means we would be talking about Paulie numbers
columns of natural numbers now with no zeros
allowed we could still include alpha as the poly
number zero one just as before so we could still
rewrite this polynomial say this horizontal or
standard alpha form and we would still have the
operations of addition and multiplication these
are all natural numbers these are all natural
numbers and you add them you're still getting all
natural numbers similarity if you multiply two of
them you always get natural numbers so this is
a nice little closed system which is smaller in
some sense than the positive poly numbers we were
considering before so in trying to keep an analogy
between these two things it's not an interesting
thing to contemplate these poly numbers are sort
of fundamental building blocks for polynomial
arithmetic just the way natural numbers were
the building blocks over here so from that point
of view how would we then proceed to define the
integral power numbers fractional power numbers
and rational poly numbers the answer exactly the
way we proceed to define integers fractions and
rational numbers over here we can mimic exactly
what we're doing over here and even better the
proofs that we need for the various laws that
the operation satisfy over here more or less at
work over here without any significant alteration
this is an economy of thought and economy of work
and it's clearly a kind of a mirroring that we
should respect so let's just briefly have a look
at how that would go it's a slightly different
way of thinking now about Polly numbers so
how would we define integral Polly numbers
well we do it just the way we defined integers in
basic arithmetic an integral poly number is just
a pair of poly numbers written in this expression
P less Q with exactly the same kind of convention
that P less Q equals R less s precisely when
P plus s equals R plus Q so for example this
poly number less this poly number would be the
same as this one less this one because this one
plus this one would be seven seven six and this
one plus this one would be seven seven six now
both of these in our minds represent the integral
part number that we would previously have written
like this because for less six is really minus
two as an integer one less five is really minus
four is an integer six minus one is really five
it doesn't matter if we use these two for these
two we still get the same but it allows us define
an integral Pauline number not as a poly number
consisting of integers but rather as a pair of
poly numbers natural poly numbers if you like
well the operations are just as before effectively
nothing changed computationally doesn't change
just means that we have a slightly different
definition of what an integral poly number is
exactly in a parallel way we can do the same thing
for a fractional poly number I remind you that an
ordinary fraction was a pair of you know numbers
a over B so here a fractional poly number is a
haier P over Q where P and Q are natural poly
numbers this convention is the convention for
equality between fractions P over Q equals R
over s precisely when P times s equals R times
Q kind of a multiplicative analog of that one so
for example here is a fractional poly number now
1/4 over 2 3 1 that's equal to 3 12 over 6 9 3
because well because this times this equals this
times this or a simpler way of seeing it is just
that if you take this 1 you multiply by 3 you get
that you take this you multiply by 3 you get that
now this is a strange kind of object until you
perhaps rewrite it in standard Alpha form if you
do that then say this one here would be 3 plus 12
alpha over 6 plus 9 alpha plus 3 alpha squared
this kind of expression is something that we
build up from paly numbers by allowing division
not the formal definition of what a fractional
poly number is is it's a pair of regular and
natural poly numbers and this is the way we can
write it down in a more familiar way and these
fractional poni numbers well their operations
that they allow our addition multiplication and
division and all the numbers that are entering
here have to be natural numbers bigger than zero
so now we get to rational poly numbers these are
going to be very important objects for us they
are very important objects in mathematics and
our definition of them is entirely analogous now
to the way we define rational numbers from natural
numbers for start with natural numbers then we go
to integers then we go to rational numbers here
in the poly situation we started with natural
poly numbers go to integral poly numbers then
to rational poly numbers so a rational poly
number is a pair P over Q where P and Q are
now allowed to be integral poly numbers in other
words they have negative signs possibly in their
coefficients and zeros as well the convention for
equality is exactly as the same for fractions and
exactly the same for regular rational numbers
here's an example of a rational poly number one
zero minus two over two minus five we multiply
both of them by two we get to 0 minus 4 over 4
minus 10 those are the same rational numbers
and in standard outperform this one here say
is 1 minus 2 alpha squared this one is 2 minus 5
alpha so we're talking about this object which is
usually called a rational function in mathematics
a rational function in the variable alpha but
there's no function actually involved here at
all okay it has nothing to do with functions
at this stage this is simply an expression that
we create by taking the formal quotient of two
integral poly numbers okay now with these objects
we can now do all kinds of arithmetic because we
have four operations and what is the definition
of these operations so there's a we have to define
addition if you define multiplication subtraction
division well these definitions are exactly the
same as the definitions for those operations
for rational numbers I hope they look familiar
right if you just looked at them you wouldn't be
able to tell that I'm talking about poly numbers
you might think I'm just talking about ordinary
rational numbers the laws are exactly the same
and the proofs of the formulas the laws that
these operations satisfy they're also pretty
well exactly the same as for rational numbers
that's the advantage in carrying everything over
from ordinary numbers to poly numbers completely
without losing anything without dropping anything
everything's just moved right over so everything
still basically works okay it's still necessary
for one to write these things down okay but I'm
not going to do that it's a great exercise and
eventually we're to talk about a project that
we can we can attempt to try to get people
to actually start contributing to writing some
of these important things down in a way that's
accessible and usable by a wider community right
now I just want you to to ingest the definition
of a rational poly number this is going to play
a big role for us as we move through foundations
of mathematics because it'll turn out that this
is gives us the second most important field in
mathematics so the field of rational poly numbers
is the second most important field in mathematics
in my view after the rational numbers and in some
ways it's very parallel to it here is a little
interesting aside that some of you might like
to think about in our square with four objects
we went from natural numbers to integers down to
rational numbers but the diagram suggested that
you should also be able to go from natural numbers
to fractions to rational numbers in other words we
should be able to define rational numbers once
we have fractions defined but perhaps integer
is not defined so I'm going to leave it as an
exercise for you to how do you go from fractions
to rational numbers and the corresponding poly
question will be how do you go from poly fractions
to poly rational numbers so we are going to talk
a lot more about the arithmetic of rational poly
numbers this is just a initial orientation to how
we are going to proceed I want you to have firmly
in mind this parallel between ordinary arithmetic
and poly arithmetic the difference between primary
school arithmetic and high school arithmetic in a
simple kind of way all right so a good preliminary
to actually doing arithmetic with rational poly
numbers is to think a little bit about division
with ordinary integral poly numbers and that's
what I want to talk about for the rest of the
lecture today we're gonna just talk about how do
you divide one integral poly number by another so
let's have a look at this example here in the
standardout form here is one polynomial here's
another polynomial we're multiplying them together
and let's just check that we get this polynomial
here so how do we multiply when we have sort
of them both in horizontal standard alpha form
well the first entry is 2 times 1 the next entry
over here is 2 times 3 plus the coefficient here
1 times 1 that's 7 and then the next entry alpha
squared well it's 2 times the Alpha squared term
over here but there is no alpha squared term there
plus 1 times 3 which is 3 plus minus 1 times 1 if
I total of 2 and the alpha cubed term well for
that it's really amounts to just asking well how
can you get an alpha cubed you can get an alpha
cubed only by multiplying that alpha times that
alpha squared and the coefficient is minus 3 so
over here is the corresponding multiplication in
our usual original way of thinking about integral
Paulino you can check it there okay so this
probably number of times this point number is this
poly number so it follows that if we take this
poly number and divide it by this poly number we
should get this one in other words the definition
of division of polynomials would be exactly this
that in this time this equals this then this
divided by this equals this or conversely this
divided by this one equals that one so division
is the inverse operation to multiplication okay
so now here's an interesting computational problem
suppose that we didn't know what the answer was
suppose that we knew that this was a factor of
this one we knew that there was some polynomial
that multiplied this one to get this one how
would we get that polynomial how would we figure
out what this right hand side is if we're just
given these two polynomials here or the other way
around how would we get this thing here if we just
knew the numerator here and the denominator well
we think about it for a little law suppose we're
sort of thinking what could the possibilities
be for this polynomial over here well it's got
to have the property that when we multiply it by
this one we get this one so the the constant term
here times the constant term here equals two that
means that the constant term really has to be one
and similarly over here the constant term on this
side whatever it is times one has to be two so
in this case the constant term has to be two all
right so that gives us an idea that maybe we can
work systematically sort of figure out what the
first term is and then what's the ten second term
and once the determined and work systematically in
fact we can do exactly like that and it's really
just the process of division thought about in
a slightly different way he really goes back to
the long division that we did for ordinary numbers
but in fact it's a little bit simpler in a way so
let's have a look at this important algorithm
of how to divide one polynomial by another so
we're gonna set things up just the way we did for
division of ordinary numbers and you might like to
go back to that earlier video in the series where
I talk about division so we want this polynomial
divided by this polynomial will write a line
another vertical separation there and what we're
really doing is we're asking how many copies of
this polynomial can we fit inside this polynomial
it's the same kind of question as dividing 36 by
9 you want to know how many nines feticide 36 now
the situation is made a somewhat easier here in
this situation because all the powers of alpha
are clearly separated we can start on the left
we can say all right that's our two there on the
left that's the order 0 term or the constant term
over here there's a 2 so we have to multiply this
thing once to get that to so we're gonna take one
copy of this thing initially and there's the one
copy right there I've just copied again and we're
going to subtract that one copy from the original
polynomial 2 minus 2 is 0 7 alpha minus alpha 6
alpha 2 alpha squared minus minus alpha squared
is 3 alpha squared and minus 3 alpha cubed well
we're not subtracting any alpha cube so we still
have minus 3 alpha cubed so we've taken away
one of these polynomials and now we have this
somewhat smaller object and we wanted to ask well
how many of these feet inside here and again we
look at the lowest term right here which is six
alpha here the lowest term is two and so we can
just disregarding everything else just looking at
that six alpha and looking at that too we say all
right three alpha times this one will match up
with that six alpha there so we'll take three
alpha copies of this in other words we'll multiply
this by three alpha giving a six alpha plus three
alpha squared minus 3 alpha cubed when we take
the difference we get exactly zero so altogether
we've taken away how many copies of this one plus
3 alpha copies of this and so that's the answer
so I emphasize this is just like long division for
numbers except it's simpler it's simpler because
we don't have to worry about carries each of the
powers of alpha acts completely independently
of the other powers of alpha when we're doing
ordinary arithmetic with powers of 10 the powers
of 10 can overlap if we have more than 10 tens or
actually more than nine tens we have to create a
hundred so the tens contributed to the hundreds
column and that kind of carrying can become quite
complicated here nothing like that is happening
every column stays just within itself but you can
see now why the long division process or algorithm
for ordinary numbers is important it's important
because it's setting up this important algorithm
for doing polynomial division this is why students
who have not learned long division are at a great
handicap when it comes to doing algebra because
they cannot divide one polynomial by another
their calculators most of the time will not do
that for them and they have never learned how do
it by hand it's a big shame okay division is very
important it's important operation it's important
to understand how that goes let's have a look at
this example from a different point of view this
is not the only way that we can arrive at this
answer so let's look at that same question but in
a slightly different way so there's the polynomial
that we want to divide divide by it by this now
what we're going to do is going to say alright
let's think about starting not with the lowest
order terms but rather the highest order terms
the highest order term here is a minus 3 alpha
cubed so how many of these things will fit in
here in order to get rid of that minus 3 alpha
cubed we want to sort of cancel it well 3 alpha
of them we take 3 alphas of these then we'll have
minus 3 alpha cube then when we subtract we'll get
zero so if we multiply this by 3 alpha well we
also have 6 alpha plus 3 alpha squared and minus
3 alpha cubed when we take that away so this minus
this we get 2 plus alpha minus alpha squared and
of course zero here because we arrange that so
we've taken three alphas of these away and now
we're left with this and we ask how many of these
fit into here the answer is exactly one one times
this is that the difference is zero and we get the
same answer of course one plus three alpha so the
moral of the story is there's a bit of ambiguity
or there's some choice here when we're dividing
we don't necessarily have to start on the left we
don't necessarily have to start on the right we
can choose which one we want to do okay so if we
know that the division works exactly which we do
in this case in other words we know that there's
no remainder at the end then both methods work
and both methods have something to recommend
them I like to think of the the first method
which concentrates on the lower power is first
as a sort of an analytic approach and to think
of the second method which works on the higher
powers first as a more of an algebraic approach
but that's just the way I think about it but it
might be useful for you to think about it at two
so I suppose this is actually more in keeping with
what actually happens in the hindu-arabic system
in the hindu-arabic system we is the highest
powers of 10 that you work on first right these
are actually sort of the highest powers of 10 even
though we've written them here on the right hand
side did we really need to work in the standard
alpha form could we have done this all with the
Polli numbers themselves with the actual columns
of numbers well yes we could have let's have a
look at how that would go now we're working with
columns so we're going to orient our work a little
bit differently instead of sort of going down
we're going to go across but I hope you'll see
that the idea is very similar so here we have
this poly number divided by this Paula number
this is now the second case that were examining
okay so the question is how many of these fit
inside here well there's going to be two solutions
so there's solution number one and there solution
number two the solution number one we're going
to concentrate on lower powers first sort of the
analytic approach so we look at the top here and
look at this two and say okay how many of these do
we need to to get rid of that two or to match that
to yeah if there's exactly two of them two times
this will be the poly number26 and now when we
take this part number and subtract to six so we're
going across now subtracting that bar means the
result of the subtraction two minus two is zero
7 minus 6 is 1 2 minus 0 is 2 3 minus 3 minus
0 is minus 3 so now had this one okay now what
Polly number do we have to multiply by in order
to sort of get rid of the next nonzero term here
this one how many of these can we subtract from
this one the answer is zero one of them others if
we multiply this polynomial by zero one remember
the effect of that is simply to move it down one
so we're getting exactly this Polly number here
now that's one that matches up with this one here
so when we take the difference we get two zeros
now and also a minus one and a minus three so now
we're at this stage here we ask how many of these
will fit into here the answer is this many of them
we have to multiply by zero zero minus one the
effect of which is to move this thing down one two
and also x minus one giving us that exactly that
you take the difference we get zero so altogether
we've taken this polly number multiplied it by two
by 0 1 and by 0 0 minus 1 in other words by that
total polly number 2 1 minus 1 that's the answer
that was the polly number we were calling 2 plus
alpha minus alpha squared so you see the powers
of alpha are not needed at all they're just a
way of keeping track of what's going on but the
positions of things will do that for us as well
here's the algebraic approach the same question
the algebraic approach where we try to get rid
of the higher order terms first so we look at this
polly number the highest order here is the minus 3
how many of these do we have to use to get rid of
that minus 3 well we'll multiply this one first by
0 0 1 that'll sort of slide it down 2 and then by
minus 1 that'll give us exactly this polly number
I haven't put the zero zeros there we take the
difference to seven-30 now we're at this level
here how many of these fit into here multiplied
by this poly number shift down one multiplied
by one to ensure that we're getting a three there
then that three will cancel with the three that's
there will have a zero at the next level so here
we're working sort of up from the bottom here we
were working down from the top okay so after we've
multiplied by this one and subtracted we get to
six and that's just two times this one here and
the difference is zero and the total that we've
subtracted is to one minus one so here's how
you can practice this it's a very good thing
to practice take the product of two polynomials
just make up any two integral poly numbers and
multiply them together all right and then you and
then you take the result and divide it by one of
them you should get the answer which is the other
one so if you put it aside for a day or two you
may you may have forgotten what the second factor
was and then you can divide the product by one of
the factors go through the algorithm see if you
couldn't recover the the original second factor
they can try it both ways you could try just
using the the numbers the columns of numbers that
poly numbers themselves or you can do it in the
somewhat more familiar sort of long division form
with with things in alpha form this discussion
suggests that maybe you'll be nice to have poly
numbers which are instead of being columns which
are rows then we could apply the same kind of
algorithm as we did on the previous stage but
without any alphas just have poly numbers where
we had the polynomials so does it make sense to
talk about row poly numbers well guess it does
and it's actually most interesting if we think
in our minds of having both rope Olly numbers and
Colin poly numbers sort of floating around at the
same time that adds an interesting two-dimensional
aspect of things which on the polynomial side is
really amounting to having a polynomial in more
than one variable when we consider polynomials
we often want to work with more than one variable
and next time we're going to talk a little bit
about that introducing a two-dimensional aspect
to the poly numbers that we're considering so
row poly numbers as well as column poly numbers
next time I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening